>> Welcome, Luke.
Now, you are one of Australia's
leading health and lifestyle
personalities.
You've been a finalist
on "My Kitchen Rules."
You're now the CEO of Paleo Way.
You're a passionate lover of
good food and clean living,
and you're also the ambassador
of the Black Dog Institute.
So first of all,
can you just tell us
what made you get involved
with the Black Dog Institute.
>> For me, it was simple.
I haven't always
felt amazing myself,
and I've struggled from
depression and anxiety
personally.
So with my profile on
"My Kitchen Rules,"
a lot of different charities
would approach me and say,
would you like to
be the ambassador?
And when Black Dog
Institute approached me,
it was a no brainer,
because it was something
that had touched me
personally, but it was
something I really believed in.
And if I'm going to stand
up and talk about something,
I want to believe
in it deep within.
So it was a great opportunity.
What I love about
Black Dog Institute is
that they're a
non-profit organization,
and one of their
biggest key message
points that they try to get out
there is exercise your mood.
Now, my background is
as a personal trainer.
For the last 15 years, I've
been teaching people boxing down
on Bondi Beach.
And the fact that exercise has
such a massive dramatic part
to play in your mood just felt
like a really, really good fit
for me.
And then with the combination
of "My Kitchen Rules"
that whole food and fitness--
they just go hand in hand.
So the more I realized I
was in a perfect position
to talk about exercise
lifting your mood,
but also foods that
boost your mood.
So it just made sense.
So I'm wrapped.
>> Now, I know you've shared
with me that you also have
experienced
depression and anxiety
>> Yep.
>> Can you just share a little
bit with us what that was like
for you?
>> Look, I struggled to be
honest going through high
school.
I was having issues
with my self-confidence,
who I was as a person,
and where I was heading.
And that sent me down
a pretty dark place.
I wasn't eating the
right type of foods,
so I put on a lot of weight.
My nickname was actually
Buddha in high school.
People wouldn't believe it now.
I felt really a lot of anxiety
about group sport and group
activities.
And it was only once
I left high school
that I started to really
work out who I was
and what I wanted
out of my life.
And that's when I took it into
my own hands and going, well,
this is me.
And this is who I'm
going to be, and this is
how I'm going to live my life.
But I really, really struggled.
And there's times where
stress will get on top of me.
My emotions will
get on top of me,
and I can go through
really dark places.
I think when you do suffer
from depression or anxiety--
I think it can
sometimes be something
that you may live
with long term,
but it's about managing
it and understanding
what it is that can trigger it,
and how to probably be the best
version of yourself to
put yourself in a position
that you live your best life.
>> So you've come to learn how
to manage it through movement
and, of course,
through great eating.
>> That's exactly right.
So step one was becoming a
personal trainer for a career--
was a massive
turning point for me,
because not only was I
interacting with people
on a one to one level, which
I absolutely love, but I
was taking something that
I'm really passionate about,
which is looking after
yourself, and helping others.
So for me, it kind
of boosted my mood,
because I'm helping
others, and I'm outdoors.
So it's a win-win.
But then I did "My
Kitchen Rules,"
and that was incredible.
And I started to
understand so much more
about what healthy food
can do for your mood.
So instead of just
cooking any old recipe,
I would try and
put a meal together
that actually made sense
not only for how it tasted,
but for what it
did to our bodies.
>> And so today you're actually
going to take us through a dish
that you've chosen, and you've
chosen particular ingredients
for that very reason.
>> That's exactly right.
I certainly have.
I think when you
make food, whatever
it is, you should think really
mindfully about what you're
putting together.
Now, mindfulness
is something which
I think is vitally important
in our day to day lives.
And when it comes to
food, it plays a big part.
So in today's dish, which is
like a raw chocolate bark,
I wanted to be mindful
that all of the ingredients
had a positive
effect on our mood.
Now, there's two
major key points,
which I want to talk about
with what we've got here.
One is antioxidants,
and two is healthy fats.
Now, antioxidants I've got here.
I've got blueberries, raw cacao.
They're really pumped
high full of antioxidants.
Now, apart from fighting
free radicals, which
make us healthier and
happier, antioxidants actually
give us healthy brain function.
And what does healthy
brain function do?
It boosts our mood.
>> Our mood.
>> So that's a
major player here.
Now secondly, I've got
good fats in the form
of nut butter and coconut oil.
Now, our brain thrives on
fat as an energy source.
>> Now, a lot of people
wouldn't realize that.
>> No, they don't.
Well, it's made
up mostly of fat.
>> That's right.
>> So it actually thrives
off it when we eat it.
So I want people to
understand, I guess,
that processed foods
and high sugar foods
aren't great for the brain.
They're the things that
start playing with our mood.
Whereas when you look
at good fats, like nut
butter and coconut oil, you
are on to such a good thing,
because they give you a level
sustained form of energy.
>> So what would some of
the not so good fats be when
we're needing to really
differentiate between a good
fat and a bad fat, especially
for brain function.
>> So trans fats are the fats
that we really want to be
avoiding.
So don't just say, OK, cool
I can eat healthy fats.
That's not deep fried food.
That's kind of not
where we're going here.
We're going for real
natural fats from products
such as coconut oil, or
avocado, nuts, seeds,
or animal fats, the fats
that, as humans, we're
actually designed to eat
on a day to day level.
Perhaps steer away from
things that are manufactured,
and you know you're onto a
good fat, like olive oils,
and avocado oil is fantastic.
>> All right, beautiful.
>> Well, look, shall I get
started while we have a bit
of a chat.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
Let's do it together.
>> So it's pretty simple.
The first steps I'm going
to do is just melt down
the coconut oil
and the nut butter,
and mix it with some
natural sweetener,
and today we've got raw honey.
Now, the reason
I'm using raw honey
is because it's got
antibacterial benefits
in there, as well.
So if we're talking
about health,
this is one hell of a
chocolate healthy bar.
>> Beautiful.
>> I'll put that in.
Now, I'm going to put about a
cup of coconut oil in there.
Now, coconut oil is actually
firm at room temperature,
unless you live
up in Queensland.
>> And what are some of the
other benefits of coconut oil,
other than it being
a really healthy fat?
I've heard that it's also
great for fighting bacteria,
antifungal.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> Is that right?
>> That's exactly right.
It does fight bacteria
and antifungal.
And it's got what's
called MCT oils.
Now, MCTs have been proven
to increase your metabolism.
We'd all like a
little bit of that.
>> That's too bad.
If you can have a
chocolate bar that actually
increases your
metabolism, you're
onto a very, very good thing.
>> I'm liking it already.
>> Now look, I've put
the coconut oil in there.
Now that's going to
melt down, and then
what I'm going to put in
here is the nut butter.
Now, I'm using
almond butter today,
which I think gives it a
really beautiful taste.
And that's another
form of good fat
that we're going to
get in there, too.
>> So Luke, can you use any
other nut butter other than
almond.
>> Yeah, you could use
almond, hazelnut, Brazil,
or even tahini, which is
ground up sesame seeds.
So you can be quite flexible.
My whole philosophy
with cooking is
you shouldn't feel
constrained or restricted
with what you're doing.
You should be able
to get in the kitchen
and have a little bit of a play,
because cooking should be fun.
And too many people associate
cooking with being stressful,
and it shouldn't be
stressful at all.
So as you can see
in there, we've
got the coconut oil
and the nut butter
starting to come together.
So this is coming
together beautifully.
So now it's time to add in
the raw honey, the raw cacao,
and the maca.
>> So I've got a
question about the honey.
You said raw.
And from what I've
read and been told,
that's really important,
because the moment we pasteurize
the honey, we actually lose
all the healthy ingredients.
And is that right?
>> Yeah, that's exactly right.
So you don't want to heat
anything to high temperatures.
You don't manufacture
anything too much.
You want it as natural
and as nature intended.
That's why I go
with the raw honey,
and that's why it does have
those antibacterial benefits
in it, as well.
They haven't been kind of
cooked out or processed out,
so to speak.
>> And so what's so
great about maca.
It's considered a
superfood, isn't it?
>> Yeah, now maca is
considered a superfood.
It's considered like a really
healthy form of energy.
It's like the Peruvian ginseng.
>> Wow.
>> But what it also has
is very powerful adaptogen
capabilities.
So what that means is it
levels out your hormones.
It's actually very,
very powerful.
So I do recommend to anyone
who uses maca to make sure
that they start off slowly,
because it can actually
change their whole
mood and how they feel.
>> So small amounts.
>> Be mindful with maca.
Yeah, introduce
it in small doses.
But it's about leveling
out your whole system,
so you're back in
calibration, so to speak.
>> So your hormonal balance
throughout the day becomes just
nice, and smooth, consistent.
>> That is exactly right.
Now, what you see in
here is I'm melting
down so that all
that cacao breaks up,
and we don't have
any large chunks.
Not that there'd be
anything wrong with that.
I do love a bit of chocolate.
That's for sure.
But I figure if you're
going to eat chocolate,
and you're going
to have a treat,
make sure it's actually doing
something positive for you,
because I don't think
people understand
when they hone into--
say you're feeling down,
or you're feeling sad.
And one of the most
common things to do
is to maybe eat your
feelings or emotions.
Now, when people
reach for bad food,
it actually feeds how they're
feeling, and they feel worse.
Not only do they have
maybe poor self body
image because of the
food that they're eating,
but that food actually
harms how we think and feel.
You want to go as
natural as possible.
That's why I absolutely
love this recipe.
>> And what I'm loving
about this is that,
when we are feeling down, or
more stressed than we want
to be, or emotionally down, we
do tend to go for those kind
of more comfort foods,
which tend to be sweeter.
And so what I'm seeing here is
a really healthy alternative
to kind of fulfill that
sweet comfort need that we're
craving, but in a way
that's actually not
going to do the damage to
our brain, and our mood,
and our hormones that other
processed foods would.
>> That is exactly right, and
that's why I love using raw
cacao, because chocolate is
known as an age old remedy
for not feeling your best,
because raw cacao actually does
boost your mood with its
high antioxidant value.
But people don't understand
that it's the raw cacao, not all
the sugar and the other
crap that's in that stuff
that they're buying.
>> So that's exactly
what I wanted to ask.
At the end of the day,
there's a big difference
between this raw cocoa
powder than the bought
solid block of chocolate--
>> That's exactly right.
>> --with all the milk
powder, and the added sugars.
>> Yeah, that is exactly right.
Raw cacao is unprocessed
organic chocolate
before it's had
anything done to it.
So it's pretty cool.
>> Yeah, that's cool.
>> And it's great to
be cooking with it.
So what we've got
here-- it's all
melted down and
looking fantastic,
so it's time to pour
it out onto our tray.
>> Wow, that is
looking beautiful.
Silky, smooth, delicious.
>> I know, right?
I absolutely love this recipe.
And a tip for anyone
out there who does
love their exercise, steer
clear of any of those processed
and packaged pre-workout
type substances
where you can't even
pronounce the ingredients.
>> Right.
>> This is perfect.
Boosts your energy.
Boosts your mood.
Gives you a sustained release
of feel good kind of endorphins
rushing through your body.
That's my type of workout.
>> I'm thinking pre
and post workout.
>> I'm thinking when you
wake up, when you go to bed.
>> Constant good mood, huh?
>> Look, I absolutely love it.
Now, we are almost
done with this recipe.
All we need to do is top it
with our favorite ingredients.
And today we're going to do
shredded coconut, blueberries,
and some crushed up hazelnuts.
Shall we?
>> Yeah, let's do it.
>> Now, I might
actually get your help.
>> Sure.
>> So I'm going to do
some shredded coconut,
which I'm going to run
across the top here.
Now, while I do this, I'll
give you some blueberries.
And then can you come behind me
and just get some blueberries
across the top, as well.
Just wherever.
That it's absolutely perfect.
And now we just need the
hazelnuts, which I'm just
going to chop up on top.
>> Now, any particular reason
why you chose hazelnuts?
>> Well, I'm a big fan
of a Ferrero Rocher.
>> Now we're hearing
all of your secrets.
>> I guess when putting this
recipe together I was trying
to get my favorite flavors
and taste combinations,
and put them into one dish.
So that's why the hazelnuts
get a bit of a Guernsey.
That's exactly why.
Now just be quite
rough with them.
They don't have to be
perfect, and we're just
going to sprinkle them on top.
Beautiful.
Look at that, all that texture.
You're going to get the crunch.
The chocolate will
be nice and smooth.
The softness of the blueberries.
>> Beautiful.
>> So all we need to do now
is put this in the fridge
or freezer for about 15 to 20
minutes, and you're good to go.
>> Fantastic.
So Luke, while our beautiful
chocolate slice is cooling down
in the fridge, I've just
got some more questions
I'd love to ask you about
overcoming depression
and anxiety.
>> Yep.
>> Now, I know, as
you've mentioned,
it's been something
you've suffered from.
And I'm really intrigued
to find out whether or not
you had a mentor that
helped you through the more
difficult times, but also
some of the tools, some
of the daily rituals
that you taught yourself
to commit to in order to
help manage, as you say,
something that is--
can stay with us for
quite a long time.
>> It's a great question, and
one which I'm happy to talk
about, because I think reaching
out and being open to help is
one of the most important
things you can do.
Now, in the past, I have gone
and seen a lady to help me
with being mindful.
Now, once a week we'd
have an appointment,
and it would be going
through different scenarios
that I was struggling
with in my life,
and working out how to be at
peace with them naturally,
allowing the thoughts
and feelings to come in,
but to not let them consume
me, and allow them to flow in,
and flow out freely
without feeling like I have
to control what's going on.
Just, I guess, more being--
being me and being confident
in what's going on.
And then the second
thing is, apart
from being comfortable
to reach out for help,
the second thing is to
learn how to help yourself.
So work out what
could be bad triggers.
What could trigger
you to maybe go down
to a less than ideal path?
And eliminate those kind
of stresses from your life.
And then the other thing is to
set a really good routine where
you do positive things for you.
So things which I
struggled with was stress.
Now, I realized that as soon as
I minimized screen online time,
my stress levels really reduced.
In this day and age,
we are so switched on.
Anyone can contact
us at any time,
and we've got TV,
smart phones, tablets.
Everything is constantly
switched on around us.
And as soon as I
pushed that away
and had designated outdoor
downtime, beach time, dog time,
my life completely
changed, because my mind
had time to completely
switch off and kind of relax
a little bit from this modern
day life that we live in.
So I put myself through a
little weekly structure,
where I made time, and
committed to exercise.
I made time and committed to
making the healthiest food
I possibly could.
And I made time and
committed to having time
away from technology.
And for me, that was everything.
>> So it was really about
prioritizing what was important
to you, working
out what that was,
working out what sort of
things were going to give you
the greatest gain in helping
you to manage your stress.
>> That is exactly right.
>> And then prioritizing those
and really committing to doing
them on a daily basis.
>> Yeah, it's about being
accountable to yourself
and knowing that we can't
expect other people to do things
for us.
We have to be willing
to go, you know what?
I may get help, but if I
don't, can I help myself?
And the power is being
able to help yourself
no matter how hard it is.
And trust me, I'm
not saying it's easy.
I've been there in the darkest
of dark, and it is hard.
And you're there
in those moments,
and I remember calling my mom
going, I don't know what to do.
I feel so sad,
and I feel so low.
I don't know how I'm
going to get out of this.
But it's about
going, you know what?
This is this moment right
now, and it won't forever
be like this.
And each day just
gets better and better
until you're in a position where
you understand how your body
and how your mind works.
>> So one thing that I've heard
a lot of people talk about that
have suffered from depression or
anxiety and come out the other
end-- they often talk about how
what they've been through has
actually been a gift for them.
It's actually taught them
either more about themselves,
or how to relate
to other people,
or how it's created them
to have more compassion.
What kind of things
would you say
that what you've experienced
has given you as a gift?
>> I think one in particular
thing was growing up next
to my brother, who's struggled
with very serious drug
addictions.
Now, he's struggling to this
day in and out of rehab.
And I fear for his safety.
I fear for his well-being,
and I fear for his life.
Growing up alongside
that made me go,
well, I don't want
to harm my body,
so I'm not going to drink.
I don't want to harm
my body, so I'm not
going to do drugs,
because if my brother can
be addicted to those
substances and not
be able to control
his intake of them,
I don't want to risk
even going near that.
What if I've got an
addictive personality?
What happens if I
try something once
and that once is
one too many times?
So for me, growing
up alongside that
taught me to look after
my health and wellness
as number one.
>> But how do you manage today?
You mentioned that your brother
is still, to this very day,
fighting the addiction of drugs.
How is the sibling--
how do you manage that?
It's still something that's
very real in your life
and must impact you on a daily
basis, and when we're family,
even when we're friends, we want
to do something that can help.
And we want to fix things,
but sometimes that's
just not our role.
So what have you
found that you can be?
>> I think the biggest key for
anyone who's struggling with
someone who might have an
addiction is to always be
there, but don't sacrifice
your own well-being at trying
to save someone else.
Ultimately, we are in
control of what we do
and how our lives play on.
I think we need to
be 100% supportive.
You can't turn your back on
someone in this position,
because if you turn your back
as family, who have they got?
No one.
But you can't do
it at the detriment
or at the sacrifice of your own
life, your career, your family.
So my advice is have a healthy
balance, where you are there
100% for him or them,
but you're also there
and 100% for
yourself, so that you
are strong in all
aspects of your world.
>> So what I'm hearing there is
that essentially you can't give
what you don't have.
So you have to learn
how to cultivate
that strength for yourself and
how to be there for another by,
first of all, learning
how to give to yourself.
>> If you're not strong, and
if you're not looking after
yourself, how can you expect
to look after anyone else?
>> And when it comes to another,
is it very much about it has
to be their time?
They need to be ready.
We can't force somebody to
overcome the challenges.
>> I guess it's 15, 20
years now of an addiction.
And the way I look at it is
all the rehab, all the help,
all the family love
can only go so far.
And I truly believe--
and I hope to see this day--
that it's when they
go I have to stop.
This has to stop.
I will not be around if I
continue going down this path.
And I believe that
realization can't be taught.
It can't be told.
It's something that
happens within.
And when that moment happens,
that's when change is possible.
>> Wow.
Thank you so much for
sharing that with us,
because it's real.
It's real to be part
of a family that
has people within that
family that are suffering.
And also when it's
a sibling it's
so reassuring and hopeful that
there is another path to take,
and there is another path that
you can dedicate yourself to.
>> Yeah, that's exactly right.
>> Now, there's also something
else I just want to have
a little chat about, because
I know that your passion
for food, and food,
outdoors, exercise,
and the whole movement for
good mood, food for good mood--
tell me just a little bit
more about certain foods
that can actually exacerbate
or elevate our anxiety levels.
>> So first and foremost,
what comes to mind is highly
processed or high sugar
foods, much like, I guess,
when kids have heaps of
sugar at a birthday party.
They kind of come home a
bit mad running around.
Imagine that as adults, but
emotionally and mentally.
You see, stimulating
foods like that
that are processed and high in
sugar give us this kind of up,
but then what comes with
the up is this mega down.
So rather than having an even
keel across the day, we go up.
We're happy.
And then we crash.
We're tired.
I often liken sugary sweet
foods to kindling on a fire.
So you have the sugar.
You have the sweets, and it's
like this big flame goes up
of energy and stimulation,
but then it burns out really,
really quickly, and we crash.
And what happens?
We're reaching for more
kindling-- more, and more,
and more.
We're like, OK, I need some
more kindling, so I'm going
to have this muffin, croissant.
So I have that.
Goes up in flames like
kindling, but then it
burns out super quick, and
you come crashing down.
That's why I recommend healthy
fats and slow release energy,
because what they are-- they're
the log on the fire that
burns all night long.
So if you can start your day
with a log on the fire that
just burns steadily along,
and you go from meal to meal,
that's what you want.
You don't want to constantly
be reaching, reaching,
reaching for that
sugar hit, and that's
why I recommend people eliminate
those foods from their diet.
>> So what I'm hearing you
talk about right there is ways
in which we can actually help to
balance our blood sugar levels
throughout the day and control
that insulin regularity, which,
when we don't do, starts to
lead to things like diabetes
and obesity.
>> That's exactly right.
>> So really using good quality
fats to slow down the burn
of that--
>> That's exactly right.
And you hear people
who say they're hangry.
It's that combination
of angry and hungry.
Well, it's actually
hilarious, but it's
not far from the truth, because
when we are reliant on sugar--
processed sugar-- as
our energy source,
you do emotionally start to
feel agitated and angry when
you can't get that next hit.
That's why people are
like, I need to eat.
I can't talk until I eat.
Whereas if you're a fat burner,
then you're onto a good thing,
because you can have
a nice bit of steak,
or some avocado,
some nuts and seeds.
And you're good.
You're sweet.
You're not reaching around
for that naughty food.
>> So we're not saying
it's one or the other.
We're saying that
we need to find
some healthy unprocessed
carbohydrates.
Go back to our fruits, and our
vegetables, and our salads.
>> Fruits, veggies.
I mean, below ground
veggies, the starchy ones
are phenomenal.
The sweet potatoes,
the carrots--
they're fantastic.
They're high in healthy
sugars and carbohydrates.
That's the stuff you want.
You just want to be ditching
things from packets.
>> Gotcha.
In fact, I read on--
there's an awesome website
that that's pretty new.
It's called sugarscience.org.
And I read on there that up
to 74% of all packaged food
has got added sugar in it.
>> That's horrific.
>> That's what we're
talking about, isn't it?
>> That worries me.
And in this day and age,
because we're so busy,
that's what people are eating.
Why?
Because it's convenient.
And that's what they
have time to do.
>> But isn't it funny?
We say it's convenient, but
then how convenient is it
to our health, where we're
actually tired, depressed,
and putting on weight.
Life is becoming more stressful
and more anxious every minute.
>> That's exactly right.
>> It's not too convenient.
>> No, that is exactly right.
So should we try a
little bit of dessert?
What do you reckon?
>> I'm saying I think
15 minutes is up.
>> All right, done.
Sounds good to me.
>> Let's do it.
>> How good does this look?
>> My mouth's been watering
for the last 15 minutes.
>> I'll cut us up a piece.
>> Good.
Good to see you're
generous with your slices.
>> Of course.
>> I like that.
I like that.
>> This is your
first time trying it.
I've got to give you
a good decent part.
How good is that?
That's for you to try.
Let me know what you think.
>> Oh my god.
>> Yeah?
We all right?
Passes the test?
Your mood already lifting?
>> Wow.
>> It's just melt in your mouth.
That is delicious.
How can that not put
a smile on your face?
>> I know.
That's exactly right.
Now that's your piece,
and this is mine.
>> Fantastic.
So Luke, I have just one
more question for you,
and it's something
that I'm actually
asking this question to all
of our wonderful speakers.
And one of the reasons why is--
it's been said through time
by the greatest philosophers
that essentially we
are what we think,
and that neuroscience is
now actually proving it,
that our brain believes
what we tell it,
and that our physiology
and our biology
then actually validates
what it is that we think.
This is still
melting in my mouth.
So my question is, what
would be the I am that you
would tell yourself every day?
>> I think my I am
is I am confident.
Now, it might not necessarily
always be the case,
but if I go by
what you're saying,
I think starting your day with
I am confident is powerful.
And I'll tell you why.
I'm confident in who I am.
I am confident in where I'm
supposed to be in this moment,
and I am confident that what is
supposed to happen will happen.
And I believe having
confidence puts yourself
in the right mindset
for moving forward.
>> Beautiful.
Thank you so much for your
time and sharing everything
that you have with us today.
>> Anytime.
It's been a pleasure
to talk to you today.